it's been a pretty sad depressing year
for desktop CPUs Den 5 was cool
literally but not exciting and then core
Ultra 200 was interesting but
unimpressive today that changes behold
the blessing that AMD hath bestowed upon
us imbued with second generation 3D
vcash higher clock speeds and more power
the 9800 X 3D somehow tops our gaming
charts and it runs cooler than the x3d
chips that came before it what the heck
that's not usually how that works at all
is something wrong that's a good
question it seems like you never had
enough energy these days get a boost
with our sponsor Eco flow and check out
their rapid magnetic power bank it's got
22 wireless charging and the building
cable according to the testing the
iPhone 15 Pro charges to 50% in just 25
minutes you can learn more at the link
in the video description
[Music]
while the 7800x 3D came out a year after
the 5800 x3d it still used what AMD
calls first generation 3D vcash so sure
the new chip performed better than the
old one but the big selling point the 3D
Vash wasn't all that different
physically AMD piled a bunch of extra
cash on top of the chip threw game games
at it and then generously distributed
high fives throughout the office with
the 9800 x3d though we're getting
something fresh we're still getting the
same number of cores eight cores with
two threads each and the same amount of
cash 96 megabytes of level three and 1
Megabyte of level two per core but
they've gone and they've put all of that
juicy 3D V cache below the core complex
die which contains New Zen 5 processing
course this change allows for better
Cooling which also seems to have allowed
AMD to juice those cores a little harder
resulting in a 200 MHz uplift and boost
clocks over last gen and a surprising
500 MHz increase to base clocks now the
official TDP has actually remained the
same but our 9800 x3d is definitely
sucking back more power both in
productivity and in games and what's
especially cool to some of you watching
this video is that AMD has committed to
finally unlock these chips allowing
overclocking we're going to be looking
at four different platforms today Intel
200 series Intel 14th gen am4 for The
Savvy Gamers who bought into that long
live platform and amd's 9000 Series non
x3d chips we also threw in a ryzen 3600x
for anyone who's on a slightly older
platform and is wondering if it's
finally time and you know what it just
might be do you like generational uplift
how do you like them generational uplift
this jump in f123 at 1080p low it's not
quite as big as the leap from Zen 3 to
Zen 4 with only about a 5% Improvement
in 1% lows and about 8% in averages but
for those of you who have been holding
on to am4 an upgrade is starting to look
a lot more enticing we're talking about
a 20% Improvement in average FPS and 13%
in lows compared to our 5800 x3d then
there's Stellaris going from a SIM time
of 110 seconds on Zen 3 down to just 92
for Zen 4 that was good hitting 78
seconds on the new 9800 X 3D that's even
better there is some decent competition
from the other zen5 chips our 9700x
isn't too far behind here but now that
we've got all of those IPC gains from
the 9000 Series alongside 3D vcash the
true gaming winner is clear and things
look dire for anyone who's trying to
compete with AMD in Shadow of the Tomb
Raider look at this it's all AMD all x3d
at the top with the newcomer breaking
the 400 and 300 FPS barriers in averages
and 1% lows respectively there are other
good options here the 5800 X 3D is still
a great performer and its value cannot
be overstated especially if you already
have an am4 motherboard but they've gone
end of life so getting a deal on one
might be a little harder in the short
term there are other options though and
we're going to talk about those a little
bit later during our value analysis bit
for now let's come back to game
benchmarks where cyberpunk shows similar
gains over every other chip and Intel
gets just demolished across multiple
Generations I mean I guess a little more
gen to gen uplift would be nice to see
for the 9800 x3d but it's clear we're
off to a bloody good start and a bloody
good continuation Total War Warhammer 3
is yet another win it isn't much better
than the 9700x but it is better while
we've got a few more games where the
improvements for the 9800 x3d are
certainly less impressive there's decent
improvements to 1% lows in Red Dead
Redemption 2 particularly over the 5800
x3d and while rocket League doesn't seem
to care much about 3D vcash the 9800 x3d
actually rocks in this game Crossing 800
frames per second in averages which puts
it right near the top of the list but
here's the thing for CPU reviews we test
at 1080p low this tells us which CPU is
the best by removing any other system
bottlenecks like the GPU but it's kind
of like comparing cars based on their
top speeds it's good to know and a
faster car is a faster car if that's
what you want to spend your money on but
it's not necessarily representative of
the daily Driving Experience for a
typical user so what happens with our
x3d chips when we daily drive them
bumping up the resolution in the in-game
settings I mean we've got a 490 on the
bench we might want to use our 49 90 and
as it turns out 1080p Ultra and
cyberpunk doesn't give us a huge reason
to upgrade to this new CPU all three of
our processors perform well enough and
as we get more and more GPU bottlenecked
through 1440p and 4K resolutions it
becomes harder and harder to justify and
yeah I know cyber Punk not the be all
and end all but out of the four games we
tested at Ultra cyber Punk was actually
the one that saw the most Improvement
black myth Wukong set to ultra is
basically neck and neck across all three
resolutions and so is f123 with all
three chips within a few FPS of each
other as for Red Dead Redemption 2 even
at 1080p there's really not a lot of
justification for this upgrade if you
like to make your games look pretty
which is all kind of a downer I mean I
was pretty excited but it could be
exciting for those folks out there who
don't have a ton of money to upgrade to
a new platform with ddr5 speaking of
it's been a while since I am 5 debuted
so for funsies we tried some different
memory kits to see if Ram speed is
important on our new ryzen 7 and it is
but not very faster memory resulted in
more average FPS 1% lows or both on the
three games we tested but not by that
much with 6,800 megat transfers per
second looking like the sweet spot for
Value coming back to legitimately
compelling reasons to upgrade though I
want to talk about how much better
thermals are on this new CPU both the 98
800 x3d and the 7800 x3d are rated for
120 W TDP but only the new CPU actually
draws anywhere near that amount in our
testing in cinebench last gen only draws
about 82 Watts on average while reaching
75 C our 9800 x3d thanks to putting the
vcash below the CCD is drawing up to the
full 120 watts while running 7 cooler
on average now this testing was done
with a 360 m AIO but what is clear from
looking at these numbers is that you
could Max this thing out with a modest
Tower cooler and never worry about
thermal throttling it's also going to be
a dream for small form factor Builders
and that carries through the gaming as
well in our f123 stress test we're only
using a few more watts on average but we
see another 8 drop that is flipping
wild and it kills any interest that
someone might have had in other CPUs
that have been Bri about new lower
temperatures actually AMD Zone included
but what about the teeny tiny elephant
in the room let's talk about
productivity while many of you out there
are only interested in gaming many
others enjoy Computing in a different
way I want to take a closer look at the
9800 X 3D compared to its 9000 Series
brethren in blender it's a few seconds
behind the 9700x and way ahead of last
gen respectable in good compile it now
beats the 9700 X but is significantly
behind the higher tier AMD chips
handbrake same thing Photoshop sees the
only clear win for the 9800 X 3D but
then Premiere it's back just above the
9700x prime seeve okay same thing wide
cruncher I think we're sensing a bit of
a pattern here um how about seven zip uh
yep okay cin bench oh this is something
a little different it beats the 9700x in
multicore and then Lo es by just two
points in single core very cool you know
what's not the same thing by the way our
new commuter backpack from LTT store.com
same Great Tech first design philosophy
I'm going to reach it 5 L smaller sign
up for a notification today anyway the
bottom line is if you were looking at
the 9700x as a solid do everything CPU
this launch might not change that much I
mean sure this is objectively the
fastest game CPU on the market and if
you want the best of the best this is it
but bear with me for a second here at
MSRP the 9800 x3d costs a whopping $230
R dues or
$150 more than the
9700x and if you're spending almost $500
on your CPU alone are you really gaming
at 108p I'm not trying to shame anyone
who is some of you are probably
literally professional Gamers and you've
got your reasons but for the folks who
aren't trying to go pro a decent 1440p
gaming monitor is like 200 bucks these
days and it's probably going to do more
for your enjoyment than a shiny new CPU
that shaves a little bit off of your
frame times and even for the folks with
aging systems the 5800 x3d it's end of
life but you can still purchase a 5700
x3d which is only a little slower brand
new for $200 at the time of filming that
means you could throw in a ram upgrade
a 2 TB m.2 SSD and a nice meal and
you're still paying less than you would
for this CPU alone now there are other
reasons to migrate to a new platform
pcie Gen 5 for example that might be a
Difference Maker when nvidia's 50 Series
arrives in the next couple of months but
you should choose based on what a
purchase does for you today not based on
what it might do for you later so don't
get me wrong the improvements that AMD
has made here especially when it comes
to thermals with the second gen design
are awesome I mean it's refreshing to
have something to be excited about for a
change and I'm sure these are going to
fly off the shelves as Gamers make the
move to am5 we're going to have all the
CPUs we tested today Linked In the
description below but with the pricing
being what it is I think it's worth
taking a second look at the rest of the
9000 series or even last gen if there
are deals to be had either way it looks
like team red is going to do just fine
over the course of the next year and
after their last launch I was a little
worried that AMD might need to turn into
a different kind of chip business with a
whole new website like the one I make
for my dog Workshop in just a few clicks
you can turn your weird hobby into a
real business too thanks to our sponsor
Squarespace we've been using it for
years for our own website it's so easy
to get started even my dog can do it but
Dennis I can just code the website
myself can
you Squarespace has a tons of beautiful
template and that's now all he has
everything you need for business like
invoicing marketing scheduling and more
and right now you can get 10% off your
first purchase at squarespace.com
LT if you guys enjoyed this video hey
maybe you're the kind of person who
roots for amd's Success so why not go
watch our core Ultra 200 series review
for more AMD success